Curbside Pickup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The Curbside Pickup features in Evergreen provides an interface to help
facilitate contact free pickup of library materials.  It provides a dedicated
interface in the staff client for library staff to track and manage curbside
pickup appointments and materials through the various stages of the process.
Staff can also schedule pickup appointments on behalf of patrons.  This feature
also allows patrons to schedule their own curbside pickup appointments in their
OPAC account, as well as inform the library when they have arrived and are
waiting for their materials.  

This is an extension of the existing holds functionality in Evergreen.  A hold
must be placed for an item to be eligible for curbside pickup.  After an item
has been captured for a hold and is available for pickup from the holds shelf,
a curbside pickup appointment can be scheduled to allow the materials to be
obtained in a contact free transaction.

It can accommodate several different workflows depending on how the library
decides to implement curbside pickup.  It can help library staff track and
checkout batches of items to be picked up curbside and help facilitate
communication between library staff and patrons.  It does not prescribe a
specific workflow for curbside pickup.

It can be used alongside regular (in the library) hold pickup.  Curbside pickup
can be an option offered patrons in addition to regular pickup or it can
be the primary pickup option depending on tghe library’s current service plan.

It assumes the library will have a staff member assigned to managing curbside
pickup throughout the day.

Library Settings
++++++++++++++++
This feature adds the following library settings.

 * `circ.curbside`: whether to enable curbside appointments for
   picking up available hold requests. This default to off.
    
 * `circ.curbside.granularity`: interval between appointment slots. This
   defaults to 15 minutes.
 
 * `circ.curbside.max_concurrent`: how many appointments to permit per
   time slot.  This defaults to 10.

 * `circ.curbside.disable_patron_input`: if turned on, display scheduled
    and pending appointments in My Account in the public catalog but
    do not give the patron the ability to change them from My Account.
    This defaults to false, i.e., allowing patrons to modify appointments
    from My Account.

Notifications And Action Triggers
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
There are several new patron notice options related to curbside pickup. 

When a patron’s holds are marked as ready for pickup in Evergreen, an email or
text/SMS notification can be sent to let them know that curbside pickup is an
option at their library.  This notice can be used to promote this service and
the default message will prompt patrons to log in to their OPAC account to
schedule an appointment or call the library to schedule an appointment.
notice message is customizable.  The Trigger Event Definitions for this notice
are called:

 * Curbside offer Email notification, triggered by CurbsideSlot reactor on a
   definition attached to the hold available hook
 * Curbside offer SMS notification, triggered by CurbsideSlot reactor on a
   definition attached to the hold available hook

If a patron has scheduled a curbside pickup appointment, an email or text/SMS
notification can be sent to confirm the appointment.  It will also prompt them
to log into their account or call the library when they have arrived for their
pickup appointment.  The Trigger Event Definitions for this notice are called:

 * Curbside confirmation Email notification
 * Curbside confirmation SMS notification

Patrons can receive an email with a list of the items they checked out.  To
receive this notice patrons must have an email address associated with their
account and the option for “Email checkout receipts by default?” must be
selected in their account.  This is an existing notice in Evergreen that ties
in to the curbside pickup workflow.

There is another action trigger called “Trigger curbside offer events and
create a placeholder for the patron, where applicable”.  This action trigger
does not send a notice to patrons or staff.  It is a silent action behind the
scenes that initiates the curbside offer email or SMS notification described
above.  

Upgrade Notes
+++++++++++++
This feature adds a new OpenSRF service, `open-ils.curbside`, which must be
enabled and registered with the public router for the feature to function.

This feature adds no new staff permissions.
