The Query Schema

 

Introduction

The query schema stores user-defined queries in an abstract form.  The
qstore server reads the query tables, constructs the corresponding SQL,
executes the query, and returns the result set.  This machinery supports
three main kinds of uses:

1.  Ad hoc queries
2.  Repeated queries for reports or other kinds of extracts
3.  Identifying rows that may be subject to automated updates

Queries may be customized at run time through the use of bind variables.
 For example, a query might  extract circulation statistics for a given
branch.  It could include a bind variable as a placeholder for the org
unit id, which the user would supply at run time.  A bind variable may
represent a single value or a variable-length list of values.

Although there are some limitations, the query tables can represent most
of the queries that anyone is likely to want.  In particular they
support many SQL constructs that json_query does not support.

Warning: the machinery comprising qstore and the query tables is a text
generator with little understanding of how databases work.  Depending on
the contents of the query tables, it may generate invalid SQL.
 PostgreSQL is the final arbiter.

Summary of Tables

The query schema includes the following tables, each of which is
described in a later section:

1.  stored_query – stores the topmost level of a query or subquery:
SELECT, UNION, INTERSECT, or EXCEPT.  Other tables link to
query.stored_query, directly or indirectly.
2.  query_sequence – specifies the sequence of subordinate queries
within a UNION, INTERSECT, or EXCEPT.
3.  expression – each row represents an expression, often a
subexpression of some larger expression.
4.  from_relation – each row represents a FROM clause, or part of a FROM
clause, identifying a table, view, subquery, or function from which the
data are to be drawn.
5.  select_item – each row specifies the location and content of an
entry in a SELECT list.
6.  order_by_item – each row specifies the location and content of an
entry in an ORDER BY list.
7.  function_sig – represents the names and return types of functions.
8.  case_branch – represents branches in CASE expressions.
9.  datatype – defines datatypes that may be used in CAST expressions.
10. bind_variable – represents bind variables whose values may be
supplied at execution time.

Three other tables are currently unused, and will not be discussed in
any detail here:

1.  record_column – defines column sets for functions in a FROM clause.
2.  function_param_def – defines the parameters of functions.
3.  subfield – defines the components of composite types.

The latter two may or may not turn out to be useful for the user
interface code.

Query.stored_query

The stored_query table is the entry point into the query schema.  When
you want qstore to construct a query, you give it the id of a row in
query.stored_query.  Then qstore reads that row and all the rows
connected to it, directly or indirectly, that collectively define the
entire query.

The columns are as follows:

        id                        integer                primary key

        type                        text                not null

        use_all                        boolean        not null default
false

        use_distinct                boolean        not null default
false

        from_clause                integer                points to
query.from_relation

        where_clause                integer                points to
query.expression

        having_clause                integer                points to
query.expression

        limit_count                integer                points to
query_expression

        offset_count                integer                points to
query_expression

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The type column must be one of SELECT, UNION, INTERSECT, or UNION.  Most
queries, of course, are SELECT statements.  Neither the query schema nor
qstore supports queries in the form of VALUES lists.

The use_all column indicates whether there will be an ALL clause on a
UNION, INTERSECT, or UNION.  It is not meaningful for a SELECT.

The use_distinct column indicates whether there will be a DISTINCT
clause.  It is meaningful only for a SELECT.

The from_clause column is meaningful only for a SELECT.  It points to
the query.from_relation table to define the top-level or core relation
in a FROM clause.

.

The where_clause and having_clause columns point to the query.expression
table to define a WHERE and HAVING clause, respectively.  The
expressions must evaluate to a boolean result, or else PostgreSQL will
reject the query.  These columns are meaningful only for a SELECT.

The limit_count and offset_count columns point to the query.expression
table to define values for a LIMIT and OFFSET clause, respectively.  The
expressions must evaluate to a numeric result, or else PostgreSQL will
reject the query.  These columns are meaningful only for a SELECT.

For GROUP BY clauses, see the section on the query.select_item table.

Query.query_sequence

The query.query_sequence table defines the sequence of subordinate
queries within a UNION, INTERSECT, or EXCEPT query.  It provides a layer
of indirection so that the same query can appear in multiple contexts.

Its columns are as follows:

        id                        integer                primary key

        parent_query                integer                not null;
points to query.stored_query

        seq_no                        integer                not null

        child_query                integer                not null

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The parent_query column points to the UNION, INTERSECT, or EXCEPT query
to which the subordinate query is subordinate.

The seq_no column defines the placement of a given subordinate query
within the parent.  No two subordinates of the same parent may have the
same value for seq_no.

The child_query column points to the subordinate query.  Typically it
points to a SELECT, but it may point to a nested UNION, INTERSECT, or
EXCEPT.

Query.expression

The query.expression table is easily the most complicated of the tables
in the query schema.  There are many types of expressions, and they may
be combined into structures of arbitrary complexity.  Expressions may
appear in several different places within a query: in a SELECT list, in
a WHERE, ORDER BY, or ON clause, or as subexpressions within larger
expressions.

Different kinds of expressions call for different combinations of
 columns to be populated, as described in the Appendix.  However the
following columns are relevant to all kinds of expressions:

        id                        integer                primary key

        type                        text                not null

        parenthesize                boolean        not null; default
false

        parent_expr                integer                points to
query.expression

        seq_no                        integer                not null;
default 1

        negate                        boolean        not null; default
false

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The type column currently has sixteen possible values, which we will
examine briefly below after introducing the other columns.

If set to true, the parenthesize column tells qstore to enclose the
entire expression in parentheses.  Usually qstore can figure out for
itself when it needs to insert parentheses, but this column is available
when you need it.

The parent_expr column identifies the larger expression to which a
subexpression belongs.  It isn't needed for every subexpression; only
for those that may form series of two or more subexpressions, such as
the parameters of a function call or the branches of a CASE expression.

The seq_no column defines the sequence of subexpressions within the same
larger expression.  No two expressions with the same parent expression
may have the same sequence number.

If true, the negate column tells qstore to negate the entire expression
by inserting a NOT somewhere.  It is sensible to use it only when the
expression evaluates to a boolean result.

The usage of the remaining columns depends on the value of the type
column, as detailed in the Appendix.  Here's a summary:

The literal column contains a number (as text) or a string literal.  It
may also contain “true” or “false” as a boolean literal.

The column_name column contains the name of a column.  It may optionally
be qualified by the table_alias column.

The left_operand and right_operand columns point to subexpressions to
appear with a designated operator.  The left_operand operator is also
used to point to subexpressions in several other kinds of expressions,
such as IN expressions and casts.

The function_id column, pointing to a row in query.function_sig, is used
to express a function call.

The subquery column, pointing to a row in query.stored_query, refers to
a subquery.

The cast_type column, pointing to a row in query.datatype, is used to
express a CAST expression.

The bind_variable column, pointing to a row in query.bind_variable,
identifies a placeholder whose value will be supplied by the user when
he or she executes the query.

Currently there are sixteen allowed values for the type column,
signifying sixteen kinds of expressions:

1.  xbet                BETWEEN expression
2.  xbind                bind variable
3.  xbool                boolean literal
4.  xcase                CASE expression
5.  xcast                CAST expression
6.  xcol                column reference
7.  xex                EXISTS expression
8.  xfunc                function call
9.  xin                IN expression
10. xisnull                IS NULL expression
11. xnull                null
12. xnum                numeric literal
13. xop                operator with one or two operands
14. xser                series of subexpressions separated by operators
or commas
15. xstr                string literal
16. xsubq                subquery

For each expression type there is an updatable view containing only the
columns that are relevant to that type.  The name of the view is the
type prefaced by “expr_”; e.g.. query.exp_xbet.

Neither the query schema nor qstore tries to determine the datatype of
an expression.  For example, you can encode a nonsensical expression
like 'W' + 3, or NOT CURRENT_DATE.  Though qstore will blithely generate
the corresponding SQL, PostgreSQL will reject it.

Query.from_relation

A row in query.from_relation defines a table, view, function or subquery
in the FROM clause, from which the SELECT will draw its data.

Query.from_relation includes the following columns:

        id                        integer                primary key

        type                        text                not null

        table_name                text

        class_name                text

        subquery                integer                points to
query.stored_relation

        function_call                integer                points to
query.expression

        table_alias                text

        parent_relation        integer                points to
query.from_relation

        seq_no                        integer                not null;
default 1

        join_type                text

        on_clause                integer                points to
query.expression

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The type must be one of RELATION (meaning table or view), SUBQUERY, or
FUNCTION.  Depending on the type, different combinations of the other
columns may be populated or not populated.

The table_name column may be populated for a RELATION to specify the
name of a table or view.

The class_name column is another way to specify a table or view for a
RELATION.  If table_name is null, qstore looks up the class_name in the
IDL in order to get the name of the table or view – or in some cases the
body of a subquery defined in the IDL.

If the type is SUBQUERY, then the subquery column must point to a row in
query.stored_query.  Otherwise this column has no meaning.

If the type is FUNCTION, then the function_call column must point to a
row in query.expression, and that row must represent a function call
expression.  Otherwise this column has no meaning.

The table_alias column defines an alias to be used for the table, view,
subquery, or function.  If table_alias is null, but class_name is
populated, then qstore will use the class_name as an alias.

The parent_relation column is used for joins.  If a relation is joined
to the top-level relation (the one to which the query.stored_query table
points), then parent_relation points to the top level.  Otherwise it
points to a relation that points to the top level, directly or
indirectly.

The seq_no field defines the sequence of relations with the same parent.
 No two rows with the same value of parent_relation may have the same
seq_no.

If parent_relation is populated, then the join_type column must be
populated with one of INNER, LEFT, RIGHT or FULL to indicate the type of
join.

The on_clause column is meaningful only if parent_relation is populated.
 It points to a row in query.expression representing the join condition,
which must evaluate to a boolean result.

Query.select_item

Each row in query.select_item represents an item in a SELECT list.  The
columns are as follows:

        id                        integer                primary key

        stored_query                integer                not null

        seq_no                        integer                not null

        expression                integer                not null

        column_alias                text

        grouped_by                boolean        not null; default false

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The stored_query column points to the query to whose SELECT list the
item belongs.  The query must be a SELECT.

The seq_no column defines the sequence of items within the SELECT list.
 No two items within the same SELECT list may have the same value of
seq_no.

The expression column points to a row of any type in query.expression.

The column_alias column specifies a column alias to be supplied in an AS
clause.  The generated SQL will enclose the column alias in double
quotes.

The grouped_by column stipulates that the SELECT item be referenced in a
GROUP BY clause.  The generated SQL references the item by its ordinal
position within the list, which may or may not be the same as the value
of the seq_no column.  It's up to you to ensure that the resulting GROUP
BY clause is valid; i.e. if any item is in a GROUP BY clause, then every
other item that isn't an aggregate function must also be included in the
GROUP BY clause.

In SQL it is possible, though seldom useful, to include something in the
GROUP BY clause that is not included in the SELECT list.  However the
query schema provides no way to encode such a query directly.  The
workaround, should you ever need it, is to do the GROUP BY in a subquery
that includes everything it needs in the SELECT list, while the outer
query picks out only the items you want to keep.

Query.order_by_item

Each row in query.order_by_item specifies an expression in an ORDER BY
list.  Its columns are as follows:

        id                        integer                primary key

        stored_query                integer                not null;
points to query.stored_query

        seq_no                        integer                not null

        expression                integer                not null;
points to query.expression

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The stored_query column identifies the query to which the ORDER BY
clause applies.  This query must be a SELECT.

The seq_no column defines the sequence of items in the ORDER BY clause.
 No two ORDER BY items for the same query may have the same value in
seq_no.

The expression column, pointing to a row in query.expression, identifies
an expression by which the query results will be sorted.

The generated ORDER BY clause includes the specified expressions bodily,
rather than by referring to items by their ordinal position in the
SELECT clause.  As a result, you can include expressions that aren't in
the SELECT clause at all.

As a further result, the ORDER by clause becomes ugly and bulky if the
expressions are large and complicated.  If you really want to reference
expressions in the SELECT list by number, use the corresponding numeric
constants as your ORDER BY expressions.

It may seem confusing that ORDER BY doesn't work the same way as GROUP
BY (see the discussion of the latter in the section on the
query.select_item table).  In SQL, either clause can reference an
expression outside of the SELECT clause, but the query schema allows
such a reference only for ORDER BY.  For GROUP BY you can get the same
effect only through an awkward workaround.

These design choices reflect a sense that having to use a workaround, in
order to list an expression not in the SELECT list, is more likely to be
a problem for ORDER BY than for GROUP BY.

Query.function_sig.

The query.function_sig table stores information about function
signatures:

        id                        integer                primary key

        function_name        text                not null

        return_type                integer                points to
query.datatype

        is_aggregate                boolean        not null; default
false

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The function_name column stores the name of the function.

The return_type column, pointing to a row in query.datatype, indicates
the return type of the function.

The is_aggregate column, if true, indicates that the function is an
aggregate function such as max() or sum().  Aggregate functions
typically don't have specific return types, because the effective return
type depends on the type of the argument.

Qstore pays attention only to the id and function_name columns; the
other two columns may be useful to the user interface.  Likewise qstore
pays no attention to the query.function_param_def table, which defines
the datatypes of the function parameters.

Query.case_branch

The query schema represents a CASE expression as a row in
query.expression, with the type column set to “xcase”.  For each branch
of the CASE expression there is a row in query.case_branch.  Its columns
are as follows:

        id                        integer                primary key

        parent_expr                integer                not null;
points to query.expression

        seq_no                        integer                not null

        condition                integer                points to
query.expression

        result                        integer                not null;
points to query.expression

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The parent_expr column points to a row in query.expression representing
the entire CASE expression to which the branch belongs.

The seq_no column defines the sequence of branches within the CASE
expression.  No two branches within the same CASE expression may have
the same value of seq_no.

The condition column, pointing to a row in query.expression, represents
a possible value of the expression being tested.  In the generated SQL,
the corresponding expression will follow the WHEN keyword.

The result column, pointing to a row in query.expression, represents the
value to which the CASE expression evaluates if the branch is followed.
 In the generated SQL, the corresponding expression will follow the THEN
or ELSE keyword.

If the condition column is null, then the branch is the ELSE branch.
 There may be no more than one such branch in a given CASE statement,
and it must be the last branch.

Query.datatype

The query schema represents a CAST expression with a row in
query.expression, where the type column is set to “xcast”.  To identify
the datatype to which the operand is being cast, the query.row.datatype
column points to a row in query.datatype, which has the following
columns:

        id                        integer                primary key

        datatype_name        text                not null

        is_numeric                boolean        not null; default false

        is_composite                boolean        not null; default
false

The id is normally assigned by a database sequence.

The datatype_name column, of course, the name of the datatype.

The is_numeric column, if true, indicates that the the type is numeric.

The is_composite column, if true, indicates that the datatype is
composed of two or more subfields, which may themselves be defined in
the query.subfield table.

Qstore pays attention only to the datatype_name and id columns.  The
other two columns, and the query.subfield table, may be useful for the
user interface.

Query.bind_variable

The query.bind_variable table defines variables that may appear within
the query.  Before executing the query, the user must supply a value for
each such variable, or accept the default value if one is defined.  The
columns are as follows:

        name                        text                primary key

        type                        text                not null

        description                text                not null

        default_value                text

        label                        text                not null

The name column is the primary key, and contains the name of the
variable

Depending on what kind of value the variable may hold, the type column
contains one of “string”, “number”, “string_list”, or “number_list”..
 The first two denote individual scalar values, and the latter two
denote comma-separated lists of scalars.  A null value may be encoded by
the JSON keyword “null”.

The description column describes the variable so that the user can know
what it's for.

The default_value column, if populated, contains the value that will be
used if the user does not specify some other value.  This value must be
encoded as JSON; a list type must be encoded as a JSON array.

The label column is the identifier that will normally be shown to the
user.  It should be reasonably short and descriptive, but it need not be
unique.  The name provides uniqueness, and since it will mainly be used
internally, need not be as human-friendly as the label.

If qstore is asked to generate SQL for query with a bind variable that
has not been assigned a value, it will include the bind variable name in
the output SQL, preceded by a colon to mark it as a bind variable.  Such
a query cannot be executed, but it can be displayed to the user for
review.

Appendix: Expressions

A row in the query.expression table may represent any of several kinds
of expressions, as denoted by the contents of the type column.  As noted
earlier, some of the columns in query.expression apply to all kinds of
expressions.  The rest apply only to some kinds of expressions and not
to others, in various combinations.

This appendix discusses each expression type in turn, and how to
represent it.

xbet: BETWEEN

An “xbet” expression involves three subexpressions:

        A BETWEEN B AND C

The left_operand column points to subexpression A.  There must be
exactly two other rows representing subexpressions B and C, whose
parent_expr columns point to the “xbet” row.

The values of their seq_no columns determine which one comes first.

If the negate column is set to true, then the result is a NOT BETWEEN
expression.

xbind: Bind Variable

An “xbind” expression refers to a bind variable, i.e. a value or series
of values that the user must supply before executing the query.  In
query.expression, the bind_variable column points to a row in the
 query.bind_variable table, which defines a name and a label for the
bind variable, and possibly a default value.

xbool: BOOLEAN

An “xbool” expression is a boolean literal.  The literal column contains
“true” or “false” in any combination of upper, lower, or mixed case.

xcase: CASE

An “xcase” expression represents a CASE structure, as in the following
example:

        CASE A

                WHEN B THEN C

                WHEN D THEN E

                ELSE F

        END

The left_operand column contains A, the value being tested.  Each branch
of the CASE is represented by a row in query.case_branch, where the
condition column points to subexpressions B and D, and the result column
points to subexpressions C, E, and F.  For the ELSE branch, the
condition column is null.

In the query.case_branch table, the seq_no column defines the order in
which the branches appear.  If there is an ELSE branch, it must come
last.

xcast: CAST

An “xcast” expression casts a subexpression to a datatype:

        CAST (A AS B)

The left_operand column points to A, the expression being cast.  The
cast_type column points to a row in query.datatype that defines the
datatype B.

xcol: Column Reference

An “xcol” expression refers to the contents of a column, optionally
qualified by an alias for a table, view, or other relation:

        “A”.B

The column_name column contains the name of the column B.  The
table_alias column, if not null, contains the alias A.  Since qstore
always encloses the alias in quotation marks, there is no way to qualify
a column name by a raw table name.

xex: EXISTS

An “xex” expression is an EXISTS clause with a subquery.  The subquery
column points to a row in query.stored_query.

If the negate column is set to true, the result is a NOT EXISTS
expression.

xfunc: Function Call

An “xfunc” expression is a function call:

        A( B, C, D ... )

The function_id column points to a row in query.function_sig that
defines the function name A and other aspects of the function
signature..  Each parameter B, C, etc. is represented by a row in
query.expression, where parent_expr points to the “xfunc” row.  The
seq_no columns for the various parameters define their positions within
the parameter list.

If a function returns a composite type, it is possible to specify a
subfield of the return value:

        (A( B, C, D ... )).”E”

In such a case, the column_name column contains the subfield name E.

Some built-in SQL functions don't follow the usual syntax of
parameter-passing.  For example, the following function not only don't
accept any parameters, they don't even accept empty parentheses:

        current_date

        current_time

        current_timestamp

        localtime

        localtimestamp

Qstore treats these functions as special exceptions in order to avoid
adding empty parentheses.

The extract function requires an extra keyword within the parameter
list:

        extract( A FROM B )

...where A is one of a short list of unquoted strings.  Qstore treats
calls to extract() as a special exception: pass A as if it were a string
literal, and qstore will build the call with a FROM and an unquoted A.

Qstore does not currently support other irregular functions.

xin: IN

An “xin” expression may take either of two forms.  One form involves a
subquery:

        A IN ( subquery )

The left_operand column contains a pointer to another row in
query.expression, representing the value A to be tested.  The subquery
column points to a row in query.stored_query, defining the subquery.

The other form involves a list of values:

        A IN (B, C, D ... )

Again, the left_operand indicates the value to be tested.  Each value in
the list is represented by a row in query.expression whose parent_expr
column points to the “xin” row.  The seq_no columns of the subexpression
rows define the order of their appearance.

If the negate column is set to true, then the result is a NOT IN
expression.

xisnull: IS NULL

An “xisnull” expression tests whether a given value is null:

        A IS NULL

The left_operand column points to row in query.expression representing
the value to be tested.

If the negate column is set to true, then the result is an IS NOT NULL
expression.

xnull: NULL

An “xnull” expression represents a null value (and not a test for
nullity).

xnum: NUMBER

An “xnum” expression represents a numeric literal.  The literal column
contains the value as a string.  This string may contain leading and/or
trailing white space, but otherwise must be numeric – possibly including
a leading minus sign, a decimal point, and/or scientific notation.
 Currently this validation applies JSON's rules, which may differ in
some respects from SQL's rules.

xop: Operator

An “xop” expression consists of an operator and one or two operands:

        A operator B

        C operator

        operator D

The operator column contains the operator as a string.  This string may
contain any of the usual SQL operators.  It may also contain a
non-standard custom operator, as long as it does not include white space
or a semicolon.  (This support for custom operators was inherited from
json_query, where it makes sense.  In qstore this support is unnecessary
and may be withdrawn in future releases.)

As special exceptions, the phrases "similar to", "is distinct from", and
"is not distinct from" may be used as binary operators, in any
combination of upper, lower, and mixed case, provided that they contain
no additional white space.

For a binary operator, then the left_operand column points to another
row in query.expression that represents the operand to the left of the
operator.  Likewise the right_operand column identifies the expression
on the right.

A few operators take only one operand.  Accordingly only the
left_operand or right_operand column should be populated, depending on
whether the operand should appear to the left of the operator (such as
the factorial operator “!”) or to its right (such as the unary minus
operator).

xser: Series

An “xser” expression is a series of expressions separated by a specified
operator, or (if no operator is specified) by commas:

        A operator B operator C operator ... D

        A, B, C, ... D

 Typically the operator will be AND or OR, combining multiple conditions
in the WHERE clause.  It is also possible to use, for example, an
arithmetic operator like “+”, or the concatenation operator “||”.

If the operator column is null, then qstore separates the expressions
with commas.  By enclosing such a series in parentheses you can
construct a tuple.

Each subexpression in the series is represented by another row in
query.expression, whose parent_expr column points to the “xser” row.
 The seq_no columns of the subexpressions define the order of their
appearance within the series.

The same operator is used for the entire series.  If you need to combine
different operators in the same expression, as in A + B – C, then you
must nest multiple “xser” and “xop” expressions as needed.

Strictly speaking, the “xser” type isn't necessary.  You can create all
the same expressions by nesting “xop” expressions, although it may be
rather cumbersome to do so.  The “xser” type is merely a convenience,
making it easier to express certain common constructs.

xstr: Character String

An “xstr” expression consists of a character string, which must be
stored in the literal column.  If the string contains any special
characters such as quotation marks or backslashes, qstore will escape
them as needed when it constructs the query.

xsubq: Subquery

An “xsubq” expression represents a subquery.  The subquery column points
to a row in query.stored_query to identify the query.
