Enhanced Public Catalog Printing and Email 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Evergreen now provides additional functionality for printing and emailing
bibliographic record and holdings information from the catalog, including
from an individual record or from a list or basket.

After selecting Print or Email, the user will be presented with a preview of
the printout or email, respectively.  From the preview users can chose to view
Brief or Full record information (Full includes holdings information) and how
records should be sorted (Author, Title, Publication Date).  Holdings
information can also be limited to a certain library.

Users can be required to log in to their OPAC account to send an email or this
feature can be configured to allow sending an email without signing in to the
public catalog. If the option to allow emailing without signing in is enabled
(by turning on the new 'Allow record emailing without login' library setting),
user will be asked to solve an arithmetic CAPTCHA in order to send the email.

Administration
++++++++++++++
Two new interfaces have been added to Local Administration: Event Definition
Groups and Event Definition Group Members.  The Event Definition Groups defines
the various groups for Action Trigger Event Definitions-- currently Print
Record(s) or Email Record(s).  The Event Definition Group Members defines the
options within each group-- currently Brief or Full record information.

These two interfaces expose the infrastructure behind the new print and
email functionality and library staff will not need to make any changes to
these interfaces to use the existing print and email options.  The stock print
and email Action Trigger Event Definitions can be cloned and modified to
provide additional bibliographic format options.  After creating the custom
Event Definition, add it to the appropriate Event Definition Group (Print
Record or Email Record) and the new format will be available in the catalog.

